
-- Steghide Tool Usage for Data Hiding --

Steghide works with a cover document (which must be an image or audio file) and a secret document (such as a ZIP file). In this example, we will hide a ZIP archive named secret.zip, containing a text file called 1.txt, inside an image file named laptop.jpg.

1. Preparing the Secret Document: First, compress the directory containing 1.txt by running the command zip -r secret.zip secret, which creates the secret.zip file.

2. Embedding the Secret Document: Use the command steghide embed -cf laptop.jpg -ef secret.zip to embed the ZIP file into the image. This command specifies:

• steghide: the tool being used.
• embed: the mode for embedding files.
• -cf laptop.jpg: the cover file.
• -ef secret.zip: the file to hide.

When prompted, enter a passphrase to secure the embedded data, ensuring that only the intended recipient can access it. The original laptop.jpg is overwritten with the embedded file.

3. Creating a New Stego File: To keep the original image intact, you can create a new file using the -sf flag, such as -sf laptop2.jpg.
4. Extracting Data: To retrieve the hidden file, use steghide extract -sf laptop2.jpg. When prompted for the passphrase, enter it to extract secret.zip, which will be saved in the current directory.


Embed a file:
steghide embed -cf laptop.jpg -ef secret.zip
steghide embed -cf laptop.jpg -ef secret.zip -sf laptop2.jpg
steghide embed -cf laptop.jpg -ef secret.zip -p password

Extract a file:
steghide extract -sf laptop2.jpg -p password


-- Cheat Sheet for using Steghide --

steghide	
Launches the Steghide tool.	

sudo apt-get install steghide
Installs Steghide if not already installed.	

steghide embed -cf cover.jpg -ef secret.zip
Embeds a file into a cover document.	

-cf laptop.jpg
Specifies the cover file (image/audio) for embedding.	

-ef secret.zip
Specifies the file to embed within the cover file.	

-sf new_laptop.jpg
Outputs the new stego file to a specified file.	

steghide extract -sf stego.jpg
Extracts embedded files from a stego file.	

-sf laptop2.jpg	
Specifies the stego file from which to extract data.	

-p password
Sets or provides the passphrase for extracting data.	

steghide -h
Displays help information for using Steghide.	





















