
Steganography is the practice of hiding one piece of information within another in such a way that it's difficult to detect. In digital steganography, which is the most common form today, information is typically hidden within multimedia files such as images, audio, or video. The carrier file, which contains the hidden information, appears normal and unchanged to casual observers. The information is embedded using various techniques without significantly altering the visual or auditory quality of the carrier file.
Steganography is distinct from cryptography in the sense that cryptography is the practice of protecting the contents of a message alone, whereas steganography is concerned with concealing both the fact that a secret message is being sent and its contents.


Objective: Embed a secret text file into an image file:

• Task 1: Using Steghide utility (Command Line)
• Task 2: Using Stegosuite utility (GUI)

Tools: Steghide, Stegosuite


In this lab, we learned about steganography as a technique to hide secret information in image files. We implemented this using Steghide, a command-line steganography tool and also Stegosuite which is a graphical steganography tool. 

Step 1: Open the lab link to access the ubuntu machine:

Step 2: Navigate to the /root/Desktop/resources directory and check the files: cd /root/Desktop/resources, ls

There are two files. The ine-logo.jpg is an image file. The secret.txt is the text file that we need to embed into the given image file.

Check the content of the secret.txt file: cat secret.txt

AccessKey: j7Ls9P2kRtQz
SecretKey: P2sqs#41dfW$s98hjki8
UserID: trojan223


>> Task 1: Using Steghide utility (Command Line) <<

Steghide is a command-line steganography tool that allows you to hide confidential data inside a cover file (such as an image or audio file). It has support for JPEG, BMP, WAV and AU files. 

Step 3: Run the following command to hide the secret.txt file inside the ine-logo.jpg image file (also known as cover file) using the Steghide utility. You can use the following command: steghide embed -ef secret.txt -cf ine-logo.jpg

You will be prompted for a passpharse. Enter any passphrase for example: stegano123. This passphrase will later be used to extract the embedded file. 

Step 4: Now, since we have hidden the text file in the image, we can remove the secret.txt file. You can use the following command: rm secret.txt

Step 5: The ine-logo.jpg image is still normally viewable, however a secret text file is hidden inside it.

Step 6: To extract the hidden file from the image, you can use the following command: steghide extract -sf ine-logo.jpg

When prompted for the passphrase, enter the one you used when hiding the file i.e. stegano123. That's it! We have our extracted secret.txt file again.


>> Task 2: Using Stegosuite utility (GUI) <<

Stegosuite is a free graphical steganography tool for hiding information in image files. Stegosuite is written in Java using SWT. It supports BMP, GIF, JPG and PNG file types.

Step 7: You can also hide a text file inside an image using Stegosuite. Search for it and launch the application.

Step 8: Now, go to File > Open and then browse for the cover image i.e. ine-logo.jpg file present in /root/Desktop/resources folder.

Step 9: Next, we need to upload the file that we want to hide in the image. For this, right-click on the "embedded files" box and click on Add file and browse for the secret.txt file present in /root/Desktop/resources folder.

Step 10: Now, enter any password for example: stegano123. This password will later be used to extract the embedded file. Next, click on "Embed" to embed the text file into the image.

A new file is created with the name ine-logo_embed.jpg, the path for which is shown at the bottom.

Step 11: The ine-logo_embed.jpg is normally viewable, however a secret text file is hidden inside it:

You can delete the secret.txt file as we no longer need it since the secret.txt file is already embedded into ine-logo_embed.jpg image and we can easily extract it from there: rm secret.txt

Step 12: To extract the secret.txt file, open the ine-logo_embed.jpg file in Stegosuite. Enter the password that you used when embedding i.e. stegano123 and simply click on "Extract." 

The extracted file is saved to the path shown at the bottom.

Step 13: Navigate to that directory and check the secret.txt file: cat secret.txt 

The extraction is successful.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steganography




