
Human vectors (typosquatting) as threat vectors refer to the security risk associated with typing mistakes. Attackers exploit common typos by creating fake websites with similar names to legitimate ones. Users who make innocent errors may land on these deceptive sites, exposing themselves to phishing or malware. Prevention involves user awareness, careful typing, and tools to detect and block malicious domains. Typosquatting underscores the importance of human behavior in cybersecurity.

With this lab exercise, we will got a clear understanding of how human vectors can act as threat vectors and learned how typosquatting attacks work.


In this lab environment, the user will get access to a Kali instance's GUI. A legitimate website is running on http://student.ine.local. Your task is to find the fake website running on the fraudulent server and understand how typosquatting attacks work.

Objective: To find the fake website running on the fraudulent server and understand how typosquatting attacks work.

The following credentials might be useful:
Username: Bob
Password: Bob@123

The best tools for this lab are: Firefox Web Browser


Step 1: Open the lab link to access the Kali machine.

Step 2: Verify whether the target website is up.

Open the terminal and run the command: ping -c 4 student.ine.local

The target website is up and running.

Step 3: Open the web browser and visit the URL: http://student.ine.local

You will see a login page.

Step 4: Enter Bob's credentials and login.

Username: Bob
Password: Bob@123

Click on "Login." And you will see the Bob's profile.

Now that we have seen the legitimate website, let's try to find the fake website and understand how typosquatting works.

Step 5: Open a new tab in a browser and enter the URL liuke: http://stuudent.ine.local

Here, we are adding an extra "u" in student, which is a typo, and we are visiting the URL.

You can see we landed on the website, which looks exactly the same as our original website.

If the user is not careful and tries to login to this fake website, then their account could be compromised.

Let's enter Bob's credentials and see what we get.

Credentials:

Username: Bob
Password: Bob@123

Click on "Login." Here, you can see we got the message that the account has been compromised.

We just saw a demonstration of how attackers can create a fake website that looks the same as the original one and host it on the server with a little change in the domain name, like in our case, where the legitimate website was running on "student.ine.local" and the fake one was hosted on "stuudent.ine.local." A small typo in the URL can cause the user's account to be compromised. This type of attack is known as a typosquatting attack. Typosquatting attacks aim to take advantage of user typos in the URL, potentially leading to account compromises or other security risks.


References
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typosquatting



>> Commands Summarization <<

ping -c 4 student.ine.local



















