
This section will introduce you to the Intelligence Lifecycle, and how data is turned into actionable intelligence.

It  doesn’t matter if you are a member of a law enforcement agency or a security analyst for a company, either way when you are in an intelligence scenario you will likely be facing the same landscape. On one hand, you will have a huge amount of data that must be analyzed, and on the other, you will have a problem that must be solved.
When dealing with this scenario you need to take advantage of the massive amount of data at your disposal and use it to create an intelligence report that provides a clear explanation of the solutions you are looking for.
The only issue here is that intelligence reports do not grow on trees. So, you must not only identify all this data but also classify and organize it in such a way that all this data can be converted into information.
For these situations, there has always been a process of knowledge creation called The Intelligence Cycle. This iterative model describes a series of stages and procedures that a researcher has to perform to convert the collected data and information into intelligence products capable of bringing solutions to the organization.

This process is carried out in 5 fundamental steps.

1) Planning and Direction
This first stage is the crucial element of the research process, it is the moment when you define which horizon will your investigation take.
This is where you determine the purpose of your research and what kind of information you are looking for.
 
2) Collection (gathering of data and information)
In this second phase your objective will be the identification of which kind of processes you will use to carry out the collection of such information, and then, using all the techniques you know, obtain the data that will help you carry out your intelligence operation.
 
3) Processing of data and information 
In this phase, you will take care of all that was obtained in the previous process.
Here your objective is not only the visualization of the information but also the application of decoding, decryption, validation, and evaluation techniques that will allow you to filter the huge amount of information you obtained, to identify useful data for your research.
 
4) Analysis to produce meaningful intelligence 
This is where analysts can show what they really are.
Here you must compile all the information you filtered in the previous step to obtain the solutions to your initial problem, as well as the creation of a coherent intelligence product (report, conference, etc.) that allows you to clearly explain the process you recently carried out

5) Dissemination of intelligence to the clients 
And finally, we have the final step. Here you must deliver the product you developed throughout the process to the stakeholders (individuals or  groups) that requested it. This will help these people make informed and appropriate decisions when tackling the original problem.
That is all about the intelligence cycle, now you know everything you have to know to carry out an intelligence process and succeed in the process.



https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/intelligence-cycle
https://www.e-education.psu.edu/sgam/node/15
https://www.groupsense.io/resources/how-to-use-the-intelligence-cycle-to-secure-your-brand
