
-- Securing Yourself Online --

• Online Tracking
• Anonymization


--- Online Tracking ---

A common thought that exists in the security community is that OSINT operations are completely invisible and at no time will the individual or organization you are investigating realize who you are. This is why  this kind of investigation is called a “passive operation”.
However, something you should know at this point is that nothing is private on the Internet; and since the moment you enter into your trusted search engine, your browser is giving your information to the websites you  visit. After all, every time you interact with your browser (either by  accessing a website or downloading a file), it delivers a small amount  of information about itself, data that not only allows the website to  know what type of configuration it should use to display well on your  screen but also data that can be used to identify you.

-- Fingerprinting --

Do  you remember that first moment when, after visiting an article in a web  store, you surfed to your social networks and found an ad that  displayed it again on the screen?
Well,  this didn’t happen simply because the Internet is omniscient. It  happened because, as you will understand, there are programs that can  identify “little traces” that you leave behind with your internet  browsing, and they are usually used to follow you through the websites  you visit hoping to generate a model that helps identify your interests  and give you recommendations (they practically know who you are, what  you like and where you have been all along).
These  “little traces” are usually not a problem if you are not very  skeptical, but imagine how they can impact your work as an OSINT  researcher while trying to stay hidden from your targets… It would be a  disaster!
It not only would allow the  targets to know of your existence but could also let them use those  “little traces” to find out who you are, putting you at risk.
Without further ado, let’s start with our list of “little traces” that you may know as Fingerprints.


-- IP Addresses --

Yup, what allows us to communicate is also what betrays us.
As  you know, every time you use the Internet, your public IP address is  sent through your router. This not only allows you to communicate with a  website, but also tells it who to contact back, who to send X resource  to, and how long it will take to reach that address.
And  yes, we know that you know that the IP address is the most public thing  that can exist and many websites don’t even bother to store this data.  But, even so, you should always remember that this small element can be  the first one that reveals who you are.


-- Cookies --

“Would you like a cookie, my dear?” This  is practically the question you always find while surfing the Internet,  and the reason is that, nowadays, practically all websites use these  elements to operate in an “optimal and user-friendly” way.
Cookies  store your login information, your personalized settings, and even help  you remember what was in your shopping cart. But some of these items  are the main reason why websites know more about you. These are the “Third-party persistent cookies” (also known as “tracking cookies”)
These  elements are stored on your computer’s Hard Drive and seek to obtain  information about your activity, providing data to the website they come  from and helping them to identify your likings, making them able to  give you a “better user experience”.
Some of the websites that use this kind of cookies are the following:

Note: (These links will redirect you to “TheGuardian.com” website)
- Doubleclick
- Facebook
- Google
- and more…

On the following websites, you can learn more about the different cookie varieties and how they allow websites to track you:
- https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/apr/23/cookies-and-web-tracking-intro
- https://privacy.net/stop-cookies-tracking/
- https://www.cookieyes.com/how-cookies-track-you-on-the-web-and-what-to-do-about-it/
 

-- Browser Fingerprinting --

And  finally, we have digitally generated fingerprints through the browser.  This is actually the most dangerous and intrusive element we can find.
These  are logs created by the browser, which use a variety of data available  on your computer providing information to websites about the settings  you are using, the machine you are on, etc.This results in the creation of a unique identifier that allows your computer to be recognized from the rest.
This  identifier contains information about the version of the browser you  use, the operating system from which you are currently browsing, your  screen resolution, the font type you have active at this time, among  many other things. Making it practically impossible for your navigation  to be private.
In fact, there are several  pages that you can use to check out the information provided by your  web browser. Here we will provide you 2 of them so that you can evaluate  how “anonymous” you are while surfing on the Internet.
 
https://coveryourtracks.eff.org
https://browserleaks.com


--- Anonymization ---

After what you have just read you must be asking yourself: “but, if every time I use the Internet, I have to give information to the website I access, how can you talk to me about anonymity?”
And it’s true, we can’t talk to you about anonymity, because you can never really be 100% anonymous while using the internet. However, this does not mean that you cannot make use of some techniques and tools that allow you to look like someone else so that neither social networks nor big brother (Google, please don’t hate us </3) can know who you are while using the internet.
To do this, you just need to be aware of the elements mentioned earlier and install a few tools that will help you to be a little more protected than the rest of your fellow mortals.


-- Add Extra Layers --

Before mentioning that the best thing you can do when surfing is to use a VPN  or use TOR, we think it is good that you know the benefits of Virtual  Machines, and that you know that they not only help you virtualize  operating systems but also allow you to add an extra layer of privacy to  your activities.
One of the best  exponents of OSINT (Michael Bazzell) mentions in his book “Open-Source Intelligence Techniques” that the best practice that an OSINT researcher  can do is: Use a Linux operating system (either by USB as a Live ISO or  using a VM), do your research and finally erase all trace of you by  simply rebooting the system (either by using a Snapshot, or the USB  live).
With this, you not only did your research and were able to get all the information you needed, but you  also deleted your trace, since any records that might have existed on  the system were immediately removed by rebooting the system.
For this purpose, you can use some existing OSINT specialized machines like Trace Lab Osint VM, or you can create your own OSINT Linux Distribution (you will find an excellent guide for DIY Machines in one of the following links).

• TL OSINT VM: https://www.tracelabs.org/initiatives/osint-vm
• DIY OSINT VM Guide: https://nixintel.info/tag/diy-buscador/


-- Hide Your Public IP Address --

As  you well know your IP is the “face” that you present to the Internet  world, making this the first thing that computers receive when they  communicate with you. For this reason, being able to use a tool that  changes your IP will be a decision that will not only help you keep your  online identity protected, but will also allow you to navigate the  Internet a little more privately. For this, you can use tools such as TOR Browser (covered in our Introduction To Dark Web Operations course), or a VPN.

Virtual Private Networks (VPN)
VPNs  are an essential tool for anyone who wants to conduct an investigation.  Not only does it allow you to hide your IP address from strangers, but  it also adds a layer of encryption to all your communications, which  helps a lot to maintain your privacy.

To give you a better insight into the VPN selection process, here is an excellent guide for choosing your own VPN provider:
https://www.secjuice.com/how-to-choose-a-virtual-private-network-vpn-provider/


-- Extensions For The Win! --

Another tip you can use to reduce the amount of information that websites obtain about you is to install extensions that block this activity. That will practically close the possibility that websites can track you or run unwanted scripts on your computer.
Some of the most recommended extensions for this purpose are the following: 

User-Agent Switcher and Manager
“spoof your browser “user-agent” string to a custom designation.”

No Script
“Allows JavaScript, Java, Flash, and other plugins to be executed only by trusted web sites of your choice”

Privacy Badger
“Stops advertisers and other third-party trackers from secretly tracking where you go and what pages you look at on the web”

Ublock Origin
“Filters requests to display adverts and prevents your browser from retrieving and displaying marketing content.”

Cookie AutoDelete
“Automatically delete unwanted cookies from your closed tabs while keeping the ones you want.”


-- Sock Puppetry --

And finally, the best way to keep your real person separate from your digital person is by using Sock Puppets. These tools are practically the best friend of the intelligence team.
Give or take a word or two, sock puppets are alter-egos created specifically to carry out various types of projects or research. The purpose of these accounts is nothing more than being a false identity that can come into contact with research subjects, or simply to conduct OSINT research without directly linking your social networks.
Below, you will find some of the best guides on the Internet to build your own Sock Puppet and the best advice on how to NOT build one.

Creating Sock Puppet Accounts: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zf155HW5Qp0 

The Art of The Sock: 
https://www.secjuice.com/the-art-of-the-sock-osint-humint/

Creating an Effective Sock Puppet for OSINT Investigations: 
https://web.archive.org/web/20210125191016/https://jakecreps.com/2018/11/02/sock-puppets/

Sock puppet Account Creation – My Process: 
https://garrettmickley.com/sockpuppet-account-creation/

The World’s Best Sock Puppet…Not!: 
https://keyfindings.blog/2019/01/21/the-worlds-best-sock-puppet-not/











