
Tools and Services

• The Harvester
• Maltego
• Tweetdeck
• Google Dorks (see in Google Dorks Folder)
• OSINT Framework 
• TinyEye
• Google Image Search


-- The Harvester --

The Harvester is a command-line information-gathering tool that utilizes OSINT sources to gather information about the target domain and retrieves information such as hostnames, IP addresses, employees (and their positions), email addresses, and much more.

(tool) (target domain = google.com) (list 100 results max) (source = google)

$ theharvester [help sheet]

$ theharvester -d google.com -l 100 -b google
$ theharvester -d google.com -l 100 -b linkedin


-- Maltego --

Maltego is a high-level data mining and information gathering tool, capable of obtaining real-time data on different types of entities (companies, people, websites, etc.), and representing them graphically through nodes, showing all the connections that the program was able to obtain over the Internet, about the subject under investigation.

maltego

Once started, you will see that there are 5 different versions of the software. Some are paid versions, while others are not.
Once you have selected your version, all you have to do is accept the license terms, create an account (you will then receive an API key that will allow you to use Maltego), and select the settings you prefer.
Once all the above is done, select the option “Open a blank graph” and finish the process.

The next thing we should do to perform our first search would be to go to the "Transforms" tab and "Transform Hub".
This will display the catalog of Transform Tools that can be installed in Maltego.
For this example, install the tools "CaseFile Entities", "HaveIBeenPwned?", "Social Links CE" and "Shodan" (In the case of Shodan you must enter an API Key. To do this simply create an account on their website www.shodan.io and go to your account)
Once you have installed all the Transfer Tools, go back to the blank tab we created earlier and in the "Entity Palette" select "Domain" (you can use the search bar located in the same section), and drag it to the screen.

Once you’re done with it, right-click on the entity, and click on the arrow next to “All transforms”, this will start the scan.
Once the scan is complete, you should obtain a graph, displaying all the information obtained by Maltego during the scan.

And that’s it, you’re ready to use Maltego, now start exploring all its functions and analyze all the information you got. The rest is up to you!


https://www.maltego.com/
https://academy.maltego.com/
https://www.maltego.com/blog/


-- Tweetdeck --

TweetDeck makes it a lot easier to monitor trends, follow hashtags, and perform live searches. This is a useful tool for security professionals, as it allows us to monitor for events in real-time, such as cyber-attacks, vulnerabilities being released, or even tracking malicious actors' activity

Example columns are monitoring for the following activity:

1. "bluekeep" OR #bluekeep OR cve-2019-0708
CVE-2019-0708, dubbed ‘BlueKeep’ was a Zero-Day vulnerability in Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) that could allow an unauthenticated, remote attacker to bypass authentication. I was keeping an eye on this to see how it developed.

2. #firefox OR #chrome OR #internetexplorer OR #IE
Following vulnerabilities in Firefox, Chrome, and Internet Explorer.

3. #vulnerability OR #vulnerabilities OR #CVE
Broad search term for vulnerabilities (does bring back a lot of non-security tweets due to common language).

4. "Windows 10" and "vulnerability"
Monitoring for Windows 10 vulnerabilities.

5. #0day OR #zeroday
Monitoring for zero-day vulnerabilities that are publicly announced on Twitter.


- How to Use -

To add a search column, click on the "+" icon on the left-hand side.
A pop-up will allow us to choose what type of column you want to add to the Deck. In this case, we’re going to be using the "Search" column type, in the top right.
This gives us a blank column, where we can enter in our own search queries. A quick example would be monitoring for tweets using the hashtag "#cybersecurity".

We can start to build out these searches to look for specific activity. In the example below, I’m looking for the following:

• Mention of the string "vulnerability" AND the string "apache"
• OR the hashtag "#vulnerability" AND the string “apache”

This will show me tweets such as "Wow – just discovered a new vulnerability in apache, can’t wait to exploit it!", or "CRITICAL #VULNERABILITY announced in apache v1.5 – Patch your systems now!"
We can then click on these Tweets to see them individually, allowing us to comment, like, or retweet if we wanted to!

We can create our search queries in Twitter’s platform, by using their Advanced Search tools. To get to these, open up Twitter, search for anything in the search bar, click the gear con, and choose "Advanced Search".
From here, we’re able to create complex search queries. In this example, I’m looking for the strings "cyber" and "attack", and the tweet must also contain one of the following; "apt28", "turla", or "apt32" (well-known threat actors).
We can now copy the result and paste this search string into our TweetDeck, allowing us to continually monitor for this specific activity.

And there you have it! A quick walkthrough of TweetDeck, and using it as a monitoring platform. It doesn’t just have to be cyber attacks or vulnerabilities, it can also be used to track geopolitical news, terror attacks, specific accounts, and anything else you may want to follow.


-- OSINT Framework --

This website is a hub for hundreds of OSINT sources and tools, and is easily sorted so you can find the tool that you need quickly. 

Use Case: Social Engineering Attacks
Say I wanted to create a fake persona so I could launch some social-engineering attacks during a red team engagement at my company. By opening the OpSec arm, and then Persona Creation, I’m provided with 5 links to online tools that can help me with the task I’m trying to complete. This can help me build a rich and more authentic profile, than if I was just filling out details off the top of my head.

Use Case: Are Target Emails Compromised?
Without diving down the rabbit-hole that is Threat Intelligence, we can quickly get a sense of whether a target email address has been mentioned in a data breach. Why is this useful? Because if we get an indication it has been leaked before, we can then start to explore paths such as finding data breach dumps on the dark web, and seeing if the email address has been linked with any passwords – then we can use these for password or social-engineering attacks. If we visit the Email Address branch, then the Data Breach sub-branch, we are provided with a number of online services that allow us to enter email addresses in, to see if they have been breached.

Use Case: Boosting OSINT Skills And Knowledge
OSINT Framework offers a good selection of OSINT training resources, so if you’re looking to further your skills then check these out. These are available under the Training branch.

https://osintframework.com/


-- TinyEye --

TinEye is an image search and recognition company, which offers customers the ability to receive alerts when their images are identified on the internet. 
Anyone can use TinEye to conduct reverse image searches, which is where we upload an image and see where else it is present on the internet. 

Using TinEye:
Head over to https://tineye.com/ and you’ll see the below search bar at the top of the page. You have the option of uploading an image, or using a URL that takes you to a hosted image. 


Use Case: Identifying Social-Media Fakes
When people create fake social-media accounts, it’s extremely likely that they’re not using a unique photo. Chances are they’ve google something along the lines of “profile photo generator” and used one of them. These are usually really easy to identify just by looking at them (no one smiles that much), however using TinEye we can quickly identify fakes by seeing how common the profile photo is. We should expect to see anywhere between 0-10 results, depending on how much the photo subject loves using that specific photo. If we reverse search a profile picture and it has hundreds of thousands of hits, this should immediately throw red flags. We can then start to look at the websites the image features on (we can see this on the screenshot above). If we see stock photo sites or similar, we know that it’s pretty likely this is a fake account, using someone else’s photo. This doesn’t just apply to profile pictures – if an account is posting some pretty generic photos, we can also check how common they are. It’s virtually impossible for two people to take the exact some photo unintentionally, so if their images have even a low number of hits, this could be classed as suspicious.

Use Case: Brand Reputation Monitoring
Whilst there are better ways to do this, using the TinEye Alerts service, you can be notified every time one of your images is identified on the internet. This can be useful for monitoring the use of logos, especially trademarked ones.

https://tineye.com/


-- Google Image Search --

Google Image Search is very similar to TinEye as they share the core functionality. 

Using Google Image Search:
Simply head over to https://images.google.com and you’re able to search for an image URL, or upload an image manually.
Scrolling down the results page (second screenshot) we can see that Google is showing us any pages that include complete matches of the image we searched for.


https://images.google.com

































