
-- TOR Warning and Disclaimer --

• What is TOR & History
• TOR Warning and Disclaimer


-- What is TOR & History --

TOR was founded by individual researchers who worked at the US Naval Research Laboratory. David Goldschlag, Mike Reed, and Paul Syverson realized there was a distinct lack of internet security in the 1990s and  saw how easy it was to perform surveillance, so they decided to find a solution that would work to protect the privacy of internet users. Their solution was onion routing.
The basic explanation for how onion routing works is that instead of traffic going from A > B it goes from A > C > J > K > B,  and the traffic is encrypted at each part of the journey, making sure that it can’t be intercepted or sniffed during transit. This also meant that it was extremely difficult for B to identify where the request has come from (A).
For TOR to function, it needed a decentralized network – a large number of independently-owned servers (known as ‘nodes’) which worked together to  form a network, which would later be named the ‘Tor network’. To make it accessible for new nodes to be created, in October 2002 the code for Tor was released as free and open-source software, and within a year  there were 13 active Tor nodes.
The Electronic Frontier Foundation, a non-profit dedicated to defending civil liberties in the digital  world, saw the importance of the Tor network in 2004 and began funding  the work being completed by Roger Dingledine and Nick Mathewson. In 2006  they formed “The Tor Project, Inc”, a 501(c)3 non-profit organization,  so they could receive funding in order to continue developing and  maintaining Tor.


-- TOR Warning and Disclaimer --

You likely don’t need to access the Dark Web for any reason other than learning about it.
You are not 100% anonymous. Law enforcement agencies around the world monitor the Dark Web, infiltrate forums, and analyse connections to known bad sites. The Dark Web is known for illegal operations as well as explicit material. The sites we are walking you through are legitimate, and should not contain any illegal material, unless they are suddenly compromised, something that is out of our control.

We are not responsible for any actions of students that deviate from the courses’ intended path, which may expose them to illegal images, or other forms of explicit material.

Please follow these steps before attempting to access TOR, for your own safety:

1. Understand that there is the potential for you to come across offensive or explicit content, and you should be prepared to deal with viewing it.
2. As an unregulated part of the internet, there is an increased risk of criminals or hackers trying to steal your data, get you to download malware, or attack your system through the browser. Make sure all software is up-to-date or disabled, such as Flash Player and your browser. Do not click on any links or navigate to any sites if you do not know what they are.
3. Ensure you have an updated operating system, including security updates and patches.
4. Ensure you have an up-to-date anti-virus solution and it is running.
5. We highly recommend that you use a VPN, then use the TOR browser.














































