
-- Introduction to Network Fundamentals --

What is Computer Network?
People and digital devices are entities that communicate with each other among themselves. Just as people have a circle, devices in the digital world have a circle. 
This environment created by the devices in the digital world is called "Computer Network". In other words, the structure in which at least two devices communicate with each other can be called "Computer Network". 

Purposes of Computer Networks
Computer networks have become usable for many different purposes with the developing technology. The main uses of computer networks are as follows: 

1. Providing image and sound transfer (Chat and online meetings)
2. Hardware sharing (Printer sharing)
3. File, data and information sharing
4. Software sharing
5. Central management
6. Support

ARPANET and Internet
The Internet has gone through many development processes from the past to the present. When it first appeared, it was not as common and large as it is used today. The mass that could be used was very limited and was mostly used for military purposes. The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) is a computer network considered the foundation of the internet. The basis of Internet technologies are the technologies used in ARPANET. In 1969, ARPANET was connected to three university networks in the USA, creating a computer network. Later, this structure expanded and grew even more. 
This network, which has spread over a wider geographical area, has come to the present day and created the Internet. 


-- Types of Networks --
Computer networks are geographically divided into many groups according to their size. There may be large networks with millions of devices in them and small networks consisting of 2-3 devices. 

Personal Area Network (PAN)
Personal Area Network (PAN) refers to networks with a minimal and small number of devices that cover very short distances (for example, up to 10 meters). For example, a mobile device and a wireless headset connected via Bluetooth are examples of this type of network. There are only 2 devices in this small network: A mobile device and a wireless headset.

Local Area Network (LAN)
Local Area Network (LAN) has a larger area than PAN. The number of devices in it can be much more. It is the most commonly used and found network type. Sometimes a network with 2 devices can also be called a LAN. The fact that it supports much more than 2 devices in terms of capacity and is geographically spread over a wider area indicates that it is a LAN-type network. For example, home networks and shared networks within the building can be given as examples of LAN. 

Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
The Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) is a geographically city-sized computer network in which many LAN computer networks are interconnected. It connects networks with fiber optic cabling.

Wide Area Network (WAN)
Wide Area Network (WAN) is the computer network with the largest geographical area among computer networks. This computer network is so large that it can even contain continents. It hosts all other computer networks within it. An example of this computer network is the "Internet". The following address can be used to see the intercontinental fiber-optic infrastructures around the world: 
Submarine Cable Map: submarinecablemap.com

Campus Area Network (CAN)
Campus Area Network (CAN) is a computer network that is geographically smaller than MAN and larger than LAN. This computer network can contain several LANs. Usually, the computer networks of universities, institutions, or private companies are given as an example of this computer network. 


-- Network Topologies --

Network topology is a visual map to understand the physical or logical structure of a computer network. The locations of the devices and cables in the network are among the factors that determine the network topology. There are many benefits to having a network topology. For example, it is possible to see which other device(s) in the network will be affected if a device on the network fails to perform its task. If we are looking at a network topology of a large network, it is possible to see the subnets in the network and the devices it is connected to. 

Network topology is divided into 2 types
● Physical Topology
● Logical Topology

Physical Topology
It is a type of topology in which all devices and components in the network are drawn in terms of their exact locations. Looking at this topology, it is seen which cabling is made over which paths and devices. What is seen in the drawing has a physical counterpart. For example, if there is a network device in the path from device A to device B, this device is seen in the physical topology. 

Logical Topology
It does not show the exact location of the devices in the topology like physical topology. It often contains fewer elements than physical topology. Because data flow is important in logical topology. For example, data going from device A to device B may not be included in the topology if it passes over device C between device A and device B, and device C has no effect on the data that would need to be displayed on it. In this topology, it is the path of the data flow that is desired to be emphasized rather than the physical placement of the devices.

Ring Topology
It works in a closed loop logic. The sent data travels around the ring in one direction until it reaches the destination. Each node passes the incoming data over it and ensures that it reaches the target. There is no hierarchical relationship between nodes. 

Star Topology
Each node in the Star topology is connected to a central node. All data flow is done through the central node. Star topology is one of the most common computer network topologies. 

Mesh Topology
It is a network topology where there is no central node and each node can be directly connected to the other. Mesh topology is not a suitable topology for large networks. It is divided into 2 types: 

Full-Mesh
In the Full-Mesh topology, each node in the network is connected to all other nodes by cabling separately. In this topology, it is unlikely that the connection between two nodes will be broken. Because there are alternative ways of connecting. 

Partial-Mesh
In the Partial-Mesh topology, although each node is not directly connected to all other nodes, they are largely interconnected. Just like in Full-Mesh topology, there are alternative ways to reach the target node in case of disconnection.

Bus Topology
Bus topology is a topology where nodes are located on a common path and data transmission is made with a bidirectional connection on this path. In the bus topology, each node receives every transmitted data even if it does not belong to it. Since there is no hierarchical order among the nodes, there is no transmission priority. 

Point-to-Point Topology
Point-to-point topology is the simplest topology and consists of two nodes connected together. For example, a passing call between two phones creates a point-to-point topology, or a direct connection between two computers creates a point-to-point topology. 

Tree Topology
Tree topology is a hybrid network topology formed by connecting star and bus topology. Tree topology has a hierarchical order and each node can have any number of subnodes. 


-- OSI Reference Model --

What is the OSI Reference Model?
The Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) reference model was developed by ISO (International Organization of Standardization) in 1978. The OSI model is a model created to enable communication between different operating systems. With this model, it has become easier to understand network structures. It is a reference quality and has a layered architecture. Each layer in the OSI model has separate tasks. There is a hierarchical order between these layers and each layer serves the next layer. The number of layers in the OSI model is 7. 
Data transmission is carried out through these layers and the data is transmitted to the user. 

1.Physical Layer
The physical layer is the first layer in the OSI model. In this layer, data is transmitted in bits along the communication channels. Since the physical layer is only responsible for the transmission of data, it does not have any information about the type of data it transmits and what it is. The data for this layer consists of ordered bit sequences. 

2.Datalink Layer
The datalink layer is the 2nd layer in the OSI model. This layer processes the bits from the physical layer and prepares them to be sent to the next layer. The basic operation in this layer is physical addressing. The first layer responsible for error checking in the OSI reference model is the "Datalink Layer". 

3.Network Layer
The network layer is the 3rd layer in the OSI model. The network layer is responsible for delivering the data to the destination logical address (IP Address). The basic operation in this layer is logical addressing. 

4.Transport Layer
The transport layer is the 4th layer in the OSI model. The transport layer is responsible for transmission security. This layer provides many additional controls for error-free transmission of data and thanks to these controls, data transmission is successfully performed. 

5.Session Layer
The session layer is the 5th layer in the OSI model. The session layer is responsible for providing the necessary services for the presentation layer to work. The main operation in this layer is session management. 

6.Presentation Layer
The presentation layer is the 6th layer in the OSI model. The presentation layer is the layer where data is displayed. Two communicating nodes must use a common language for data representation. Thanks to this layer, the agreement is made in the language used. 

7.Application Layer
The Application layer is the 7th and final layer in the OSI model. The application layer is the layer closest to the user and provides access to structures found in the user-level OSI model. 


-- Network Devices --

In a computer network, there are network devices, each responsible for a separate task. Without these components in a computer network, the network cannot fulfill its task. Therefore, knowing the tasks and capabilities of network devices allows for solving problems in the network and understanding security breaches. In this way, a solution is reached by taking quick action. 

Switch
The switch is one of the network devices operating at layer 2 according to the OSI reference model. However, some switches with more manageable features operate at layer 3 according to the OSI reference model. The switch is the interconnection device and is used to connect the nodes that want to connect to the network. Sizes may vary depending on the number of ports on it. 
The switch device transmits the data coming from the source port only to the destination port, so it provides a data transmission that will not adversely affect the network performance. In terms of security, it prevents data belonging to two parties from reaching third parties, thus increasing data security in a way. 

Router
The router is one of the network equipment working at the 3rd layer according to the OSI reference model. The router is a packet routing device with highly advanced features that contains an operating system (IOS - Internetworking Operating System). It is network equipment used by placing it between two computer networks. For example, it is often used in LAN-LAN connections and WAN-LAN connections. The most basic task of the router is packet routing and thanks to this device, the networks are separated from each other (segmentation). In other words, it is one of the devices that separate computer networks from each other. It is a configurable device. 

Hub
The hub is one of the network hardware operating at layer 1 according to the OSI reference model. The hub device, which has a very simple structure, is one of the devices used to connect computers that want to connect to the network. 

Repeater
The repeater is one of the network equipment working at layer 1 according to the OSI reference model. There are only 2 ports on the repeater device. These ports transform the incoming signal into an outgoing signal and transmit it to the destination. It strengthens the weak signals on it and enables it to transmit data to longer distances. It is a device similar to a hub but does not have as many ports as a hub.

Bridge
The bridge is one of the network hardware running at layer 2 according to the OSI reference model. The bridge performs packet routing by connecting two computer networks. Although it has a similar task to a router, it is a very simple device with fewer ports than a router. It is also separated from the router by working at the 2nd layer. The bridge can be used in LAN-to-LAN connections.

Modem
Modems are generally small-sized network equipment in which the features of some devices such as switches are gathered together. It contains a small operating system. It is generally used in home networks to access the internet environment. It may have one or more ports on it. In addition, it is possible to provide an internet connection by using wireless devices together with the modem in wireless supported modems.

Firewall
A firewall is one of the network equipment running at layer 4 according to the OSI reference model. A firewall is vital to network hardware located between the internet, which is considered an insecure network, and the existing network. The task of the firewall, which is one of the basic network equipment necessary to ensure the security of the network, is to block or allow traffic according to certain rules. Although there are many types, the most commonly used and known type of firewall is hardware network firewall devices. Having a firewall device alone is not enough to protect the network against external threats. Because attackers can even infiltrate networks with firewalls. The firewall must be configured correctly. Incomplete and incorrect firewall configurations can negatively affect network performance, as well as cause security vulnerabilities. 

Gateway
Gateway is one of the network equipment that can work at every layer according to the OSI model. The gateway is a network component that provides inter-network communication located between two networks. In other words, it connects networks. Although it is similar to router devices in terms of its function, it differs from routers with its ability to work in every layer. In addition, there are not only hardware but also software gateway types. Gateways are a gateway for other nodes in the network. Through this device, they can go out of the network and communicate with a node in another network.


-- TCP/IP Model --

What is the TCP/IP Model?
The TCP/IP model was designed and developed by the Department of Defense (DoD) in the 1960s. When the TCP/IP model was introduced, there was no model that set the standards in computer network communication yet. With this model, it was determined how the network communication should be on the basis of the internet. The TCP/IP model has a layered architecture and consists of 4 layers: 

1. Application Layer
2. Transport Layer
3. Internet Layer
4. Network Access Layer

Network Access Layer
The network access layer is the 1st layer in the TCP/IP model. It corresponds to layers 1 and 2 in the OSI reference model. This layer includes physical accesses and hardware controls. 

Internet Layer
The Internet layer is the 2nd layer in the TCP/IP model. It has similar functions as layer 3 in the OSI reference model. In this layer, network communication functions are performed by logical addressing. 

Transport Layer
The transport layer is the 3rd layer in TCP/IP model. It has similar functions as layer 4 in the OSI reference model. In this layer, data transmission is made and the reliability of the communication is ensured. Whether the data is transmitted correctly without corruption is managed in this layer. 

Application Layer
The Application layer is the 4th and final layer in the TCP/IP model. It is a layer that covers all the operations performed in layers 5, 6, and 7 in the OSI reference model. Application-level controls and operations are executed in this layer. 

OSI Model vs. TCP/IP Model
Although the OSI reference model and the TCP/IP model are very similar models, they differ from each other on some points. When the TCP/IP model first emerged, it emerged out of necessity, not aiming to be a standard. The OSI reference model, on the other hand, aimed to design the ideal network communication, which should be in theory, including its practical use. The TCP/IP model was developed based on some protocols. The OSI model, on the other hand, was not developed on any protocol.


-- IP Addressing Mechanism --

While creating TCP/IP computer networks, a logical address (IP Address) must first be assigned to each device in the network. These assignment processes are called "IP Addressing Mechanism". If an IP address is not assigned to a device in the network, it cannot communicate with devices inside or outside the network. 

What is an IP Address?
IP Address is the ID of the device's network address. Connection operations are performed using IP addresses. IP addresses are divided into IPv4 and IPv6. Examples of both types of IP addresses are the following IP addresses: 

● IPv4: 192.168.4.1
● IPv6: 2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334

Structure of IP Address
The IP address consists of 4 bytes (32 bits). A period is placed between each byte and is expressed in decimal notation.

11000000 10101000 00000001 00000001

11000000 (1st octet)
10101000 (2nd octet)
00000001 (3rd octet)
00000001 (4th octet)

1st Octet: 11000000
=(1×27)+(1×26)+(0×25)+(0×24)+(0×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(0×20)=128+64+0+0+0+0+0+0=192
=(1×27)+(1×26)+(0×25)+(0×24)+(0×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(0×20)=128+64+0+0+0+0+0+0=192

2nd Octet: 10101000
=(1×27)+(0×26)+(1×25)+(0×24)+(1×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(0×20)=128+0+32+0+8+0+0+0=168
=(1×27)+(0×26)+(1×25)+(0×24)+(1×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(0×20)=128+0+32+0+8+0+0+0=168

3rd Octet: 00000001
=(0×27)+(0×26)+(0×25)+(0×24)+(0×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(1×20)=0+0+0+0+0+0+0+1=1
=(0×27)+(0×26)+(0×25)+(0×24)+(0×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(1×20)=0+0+0+0+0+0+0+1=1

4th Octet: 00000001
=(0×27)+(0×26)+(0×25)+(0×24)+(0×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(1×20)=0+0+0+0+0+0+0+1=1
=(0×27)+(0×26)+(0×25)+(0×24)+(0×23)+(0×22)+(0×21)+(1×20)=0+0+0+0+0+0+0+1=1

Combine Decimals: Place a period (.) between the decimal values: 192.168.1.1

Classes of IP Address
IP addresses are divided into 5 classes. In order to learn the class of the IP address, the first byte of the IP address is checked. According to the decimal value of the first byte, it is understood which of the classes the IP address belongs to in 

Class	  First Byte Range (Decimal)	Binary Prefix	  Use
A	      0–127	                      0xxxxxxx	      Large networks
B	      128–191	                    10xxxxxx	      Medium-sized networks
C	      192–223	                    110xxxxx	      Small networks
D	      224–239	                    1110xxxx	      Multicast
E	      240–255	                    1111xxxx	      Experimental

It is possible to find out which network the device with that IP address is included in via its IP address. In order to learn this information, first of all, it should be known which class the IP address belongs to. Then, the “Network Bits” fields in the table below are checked. 

For example, let's find out which class the IP address "192.168.4.1" belongs to and which bytes are the network bits: 

Step 1: Check the decimal value of the first byte: "192"
Step 2: According to the table, it is learned which class the value “192” belongs to: “Class C”
Step 3: According to the table, it is checked which bytes of an IP address belonging to the "C" class belong to the network bits: "first 3 bytes"

According to the information we have obtained, it can be said that the IP addresses with the same first 3 bytes belong to the devices in the same network. For example, the IP address “192.168.4.1” and the IP Address “192.168.4.2” are on the same network. Because there is a change only on the byte where the host bits are located. Network bits have the same value: 192.168.4.X 

What is IPv6?
Today, the number of devices connected to the internet network is quite high. Considering that all these devices have an IP address, IPv4 is no longer sufficient. For this reason, some technologies (NAT) and IPv6 have been developed to solve this problem. With IPv6, the use of IPv4, which has a limited number of addresses, has begun to decline and leaves its place to IPv6.

Private IP Addresses
Some of the IP addresses are reserved for special purposes. These reserved IP addresses are IP addresses used in private networks. Private networks are networks that are not directly connected to the Internet and are connected to the Internet with an intermediary network device. For example, home networks and on-premises networks. In-home networks, the modem device provides a connection to the Internet and manages the packet flow. The modem device has a network interface facing the home network and a network interface facing the internet side. The part called the private network is the part where the home network interface of the modem device is located. The IP addresses of the devices in this section are reserved IP addresses that are not used in the internet environment.

Class	Private   IP Range	                      Subnet Mask	            Purpose
A	              10.0.0.0 – 10.255.255.255	      255.0.0.0 (8 bits)	    Large private networks
B	              172.16.0.0 – 172.31.255.255	    255.240.0.0 (12 bits)	  Medium-sized private networks
C	              192.168.0.0 – 192.168.255.255	  255.255.0.0 (16 bits)	  Small private networks

What is a Localhost?
Localhost is the IP address range that specifies the device's own network address. It is used to access services running locally on the device. It is commonly known as the "127.0.0.1" IP address. However, any IP address in the range “127.0.0.1 - 127.255.255.255” can be used for this purpose. Another name is the "loopback" address. 


-- Network Address Translation  --

Network Address Translation(NAT) is a method that converts private IP addresses to public IP addresses. Since private IP addresses are non-routing IP addresses, these IP addresses cannot be used on the internet. These IP addresses allow communication in the local network only. Thanks to NAT, limited IPv4 addresses are used more sparingly. In addition, a kind of network segmentation is provided thanks to NAT. It is beneficial in controlling and securing the connections coming from outside the network into the network. In order to use the NAT method, a device with a gateway must perform packet routing. This device has a NAT table and IP address conversions are performed by looking at this table. 

NAT Advantages and Disadvantages
Although NAT is often used as a solution to running out of IPv4 addresses, it also has some disadvantages. 

Example of NAT
When the device with an IP address of 10.6.1.2 goes to the Internet, it must first transmit the packet to the gateway device that provides the Internet output. The gateway device receiving the packet determines the network to which it will forward the packet and the destination address by looking at the information fields in the packet. After seeing that it has an IP address belonging to the Internet, it makes changes to the packet by using the information in the NAT table, in other words, it performs NAT conversion. After conversion, it forwards the packet to the next network device to forward the packet to the destination IP address. When the incoming response packet arrives, it redirects the packet to the relevant device in the internal network by performing the reverse of similar operations, and packet transmissions are performed together with NAT transformations. 


-- Basic Concepts --



-- Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN) --



-- Virtual Private Network (VPN) --



-- Network Protocols --



-- OSI Reference Model --



-- Media Access Control (MAC) Address --



-- Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) --




-- Internet Protocol (IP) --



-- Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) --




-- Routing --




































