
--- Windows Fundamentals ---

● Introduction to Windows
● Windows Filesystems
● Directory Structure
● Windows Command Line
● Windows Users and Groups
● Permissions Management on Windows
● 
● 


-- Introduction to Windows --

What is Windows?
Windows is the name of the operating system family that has many different versions developed by Microsoft. The Windows operating system was first released in 1985. Many versions of Windows have been released since the day it was released. It has been continuously improved in every version and it still continues to be developed. Today, it is possible to come across a Windows product in every environment where technology is available. 

Usage Areas of Windows
The Windows operating system and its family are widely used. It is frequently used in the industrial field and mobile devices, especially in the IT sector. Different windows versions have been released according to needs and usage areas. 


-- Windows Filesystems --

What is File System?
A file system is a data structure that maintains the order of digital storage areas, and whose unit is a file. The operating system cannot make sense of the spaces on the disk without the file system. It cannot know which data group is on the disk as a file. So the file system is a very important component for running the operating system. File systems have different types and data structures. This data structure can be different for each file system

File Systems Used in Windows
File systems have also been developed, like every technology that has developed from the past to the present. With the development of technology, the need for new file systems has emerged due to increased processing power and storage capacity. Therefore, different file systems have been developed continuously and released to the market. Some of these file systems used in Windows operating systems are given below. 

1. FAT
The File Allocation Table (FAT) file system was developed and released for personal computers in 1977. Although the purpose of its emergence was to be used on floppy disks, it was adapted to be used in hard drives and other devices over time. The FAT file system is not the default file system for Microsoft Windows operating systems today. Today, it is used in USB flash drives, flash drives, and other embedded systems. 

2. exFAT
exFAT (Extensible File Allocation Table) is a file system introduced by Microsoft in 2006 and optimized for flash memory such as USB flash drives and SD cards. (Source: Wikipedia) 

3. NTFS
New Technology File System (NTFS) was announced and started to be used with the Windows NT 3.1 version in 1993. It was used as the default file system within the Windows operating system with this version and it still is. It replaced FAT file system as it is a more advanced file system that is suitable for new technologies. In addition, the NTFS file system also supports Linux and BSD systems. 

It is of great importance for SOC analysts to know the technical details of the NTFS file system considering that it is predominantly used in Windows operating systems as the latest technology today. Knowing the structure of the file system ensures that the security-oriented inferences to be obtained in the analyses are more and more consistent for analysts who perform host analysis. In order to have further information on this topic, detailed information can be obtained by conducting research under the name of "Filesystem Forensics". 


-- Directory Structure --

What is Directory Structure?
As in every operating system, the folder and file structure in Windows takes place in a certain order from the first installation. This order is determined by the company/person that developed the operating system. 
Although windows versions have similar folder structures in general, some folders and files may differ depending on the version of the operating system. The examples in this training are shown on the "Windows Server 2019 Datacenter". 
In Windows, the root directory is "drive:\", for example, the root directory is usually "C:\". The directory separator is usually a "\", but the operating system also internally recognizes a "/". Physical and virtual drives are named by a drive letter, as opposed to being combined as one.

Directories in Windows
The directory structure is created as follows when Windows is first installed. 
- PerfLogs
- Program Files
- Program Files (x86)
- ProgramData
- Users
- Windows

1. PerfLogs
It is the folder created to keep Windows performance logs. It is found as an empty folder because the logging option is turned off by default. 

2. ProgramData
The ProgramData folder is located as a hidden folder under the root of the disk where the Windows operating system is installed. The "Hidden Items" option must be activated under the "View" menu first to be able to see the folder. There are data belonging to the programs installed in the system, independent from the user accounts in this folder. 

3. Program Files
All the programs installed in the system are located under the "Program Files" folder in a Windows operating system installed as 32-bit. In Windows operating systems installed as 64-bit, only 64-bit programs are installed under this folder. 

4. Program Files (x86)
This folder is only available on Windows operating systems installed as "64-bit". There are programs installed on the system as "32-bit" under this folder. Programs installed as "64-bit" are stored in another folder named “Program Files” with a similar name.

5. Users
The Users folder contains the personal folder of each user who has logged on to the system at least once. Folders and documents such as desktop folder, downloaded files, and documents are stored under this folder that belongs to each user on the system. 

6. Windows
The Windows folder is where the entire operating system is installed. It has its own structure and it contains many systemic information in a certain order. For example, the database where users' passwords are kept is located under this folder. 


-- Windows Command Line --

What is the "Command Line"?
The command line is an intermediary program that receives the commands from the user via the keyboard and transfers them to the operating system for execution. 

- Basic Commands -
Basic Commands
In Windows, many operations can be done through the command line. Below are some commands that are basically used in the Windows operating system. 

1. "Help" Command
The "Help" is the command that provides detailed information about the commands used on the command line. We can see the parameters of the commands that we need to get information with the "Help" command. 

C:\Users\mirko>help dir
Displays a list of files and subdirectories in a directory.

DIR [drive:][path][filename] [/A[[:]attributes]] [/B] [/C] [/D] [/L] [/N]
  [/O[[:]sortorder]] [/P] [/Q] [/R] [/S] [/T[[:]timefield]] [/W] [/X] [/4]

  [drive:][path][filename]
              Specifies drive, directory, and/or files to list.

  /A          Displays files with specified attributes.
  attributes   D  Directories                R  Read-only files
               H  Hidden files               A  Files ready for archiving
               S  System files               I  Not content indexed files
               L  Reparse Points             O  Offline files
               -  Prefix meaning not
  /B          Uses bare format (no heading information or summary).
  /C          Display the thousand separator in file sizes.  This is the
              default.  Use /-C to disable display of separator.
  /D          Same as wide but files are list sorted by column.
  /L          Uses lowercase.
  /N          New long list format where filenames are on the far right.
  /O          List by files in sorted order.
  sortorder    N  By name (alphabetic)       S  By size (smallest first)
               E  By extension (alphabetic)  D  By date/time (oldest first)
               G  Group directories first    -  Prefix to reverse order
  /P          Pauses after each screenful of information.
  /Q          Display the owner of the file.
  /R          Display alternate data streams of the file.
  /S          Displays files in specified directory and all subdirectories.
  /T          Controls which time field displayed or used for sorting
  timefield   C  Creation
              A  Last Access
              W  Last Written
  /W          Uses wide list format.
  /X          This displays the short names generated for non-8dot3 file
              names.  The format is that of /N with the short name inserted
              before the long name. If no short name is present, blanks are
              displayed in its place.
  /4          Displays four-digit years

Switches may be preset in the DIRCMD environment variable.  Override
preset switches by prefixing any switch with - (hyphen)--for example, /-W.

C:\Users\mirko>

2. "Dir" Command
The "Dir" is the command that lists the files and the folders under the current directory. For example, let's see the files and folders under "C:\Users\LetsDefend": 

3. "Cd" Command
The "Cd" is the command that is used for directory transitions. For example, let's switch from the "C:\Windows" directory to the "C:\Windows\system32" directory: 

4. "Date" Command
The "Date" is the command that is used to view and change the system's date information. For example, let's see the date information with the "date /t" command:

C:\Users\mirko>date /t
26.11.2024

5. "Echo" Command
The "Echo" is the command that is used to print to the screen. For example, let's print "BlueTeam" to the screen with the echo command: 

C:\Users\mirko>echo "Hi all there ;-)"
"Hi all there ;-)"

C:\Users\mirko>

6. "Hostname" Command
The "Hostname" is the command that is used to see the hostname information of the system.

C:\Users\mirko>hostname
cyberpunk

7. "Time" Command
The "Time" is the command that is used to see the system time. For example, let's see the system time with the command "time /t": 

C:\Users\mirko>time /t
20:38

- Network Commands -

1. "Ipconfig" Command
The "Ipconfig" is the command that allows viewing information about network interfaces on the system via the command line.
Note: In order to get detailed information about all network interfaces, the "ipconfig" command should be used with the "/all" parameter.

2. "Netstat" Command
It is possible to view the current network connections and their statuses via the netstat command. 

Note: Since the output of the netstat command is too long, only the first part is displayed in the above image.

- "-a" parameter : Displays all connections and listening ports.
- "-n" parameter : Displays addresses and port numbers in numerical form.
- "-o" parameter : Displays the owning process ID associated with each connection.

3. "Nslookup" Command
Devices communicate with each other through numerical values in the IT world. Therefore, values that do not correspond to numerical values need to find their numerical equivalents. For example, when trying to access the "letsdefend.io" domain, the IP address of the target DNS server must be known or learned. In this case, an intermediary should perform a domain name and IP address resolution and report the IP address of the DNS server of the desired domain. It is the Domain Name System (DNS) protocol that carries out this task. There are some tools and commands used for this. For example, let's find the DNS server IP address of the "letsdefend.io" address with the "nslookup" tool: 

C:\Users\mirko>nslookup letsdefend.io
Server:  fritz.box
Address:  fd00::d624:ddff:fede:5fd

Non-authoritative answer:
Name:    letsdefend.io
Addresses:  18.102.16.191
          35.152.119.144
          35.152.104.113


C:\Users\mirko>

4. "Ping" Command
It may be needed to test the network communication of two different devices within the same network. It is possible to find out whether the target is accessed with the "ping" command on the command line. Network packet(s) are sent to the destination and awaited for the response with the "ping" command. In this way, it can be tested whether there is network communication with the destination address. 

Note: As a security measure, the target system may be configured to not to respond to the "ping" command to prevent attackers from conducting network and host discovery. The examples below assume that this is not the case.

Note: "-n" parameter: Number of echo requests to send.

C:\Users\mirko>ping -n 5 google.com

Pinging google.com [2a00:1450:4001:828::200e] with 32 bytes of data:
Reply from 2a00:1450:4001:828::200e: time=36ms
Reply from 2a00:1450:4001:828::200e: time=21ms
Reply from 2a00:1450:4001:828::200e: time=20ms
Reply from 2a00:1450:4001:828::200e: time=59ms
Reply from 2a00:1450:4001:828::200e: time=39ms

Ping statistics for 2a00:1450:4001:828::200e:
    Packets: Sent = 5, Received = 5, Lost = 0 (0% loss),
Approximate round trip times in milli-seconds:
    Minimum = 20ms, Maximum = 59ms, Average = 35ms

C:\Users\mirko>

5. "Systeminfo" Command
The "Systeminfo" is the command that provides detailed information about the system.
Note : Since the output of the "systeminfo" command is too long, only the first part is displayed in the image.

- File Operations Commands -

File Operations Commands
This section covers commands for operations performed on files. 

1. "Type" Command
 The "type" is the command that is used to print the file content to the screen. 

C:\Users\mirko>type .bash_history
ls
pwd
cd
pwd
cd ..
pwd
cd ..
ls -l
clear
fsutil fsinfo drive
cleae
clear
fsutil fsinfo drives
pwd
mkdir metasploitable3-win2k8
rm metasploitable3-win2k8/
rm -rf metasploitable3-win2k8/
mkdir vagrantvms
cd vagrantvms/
mkdir metasploitable3-win2k8

2. "Copy" Command
The "copy" is the command that is used in file copy operations. The first parameter in the "copy" command is the path of the file to be copied. The second parameter is the target path. For example, let's copy the file "file.txt" with a copy in the same directory: 

C:\Users\mirko>type file.txt copyfile.txt

The image above shows that the file "file.txt" was successfully copied and a new file named "copyfile.txt" was created. 

3. "Mkdir" Command
The "mkdir" is the command that is used to create a new directory. It stands for "make directory". 

4. "Rename" Command
The "rename" is the command to rename files. For example, let's rename the file "file.txt" to "file2.txt": 

C:\Users\mirko>rename file.txt file2.txt

5. "Move" Command
The "move" is the command that is used to move files. For example, let's move the "file2.txt" file under the directory named "incident": 

C:\Users\mirko>move file.txt incident\

6. "Tree" Command
The "tree" is the command that allows listing nested directories with a single command. For example, let's list the folders under the "C:\Users\LetsDefend" directory: 

C:\Users\mirko>tree
Folder PATH listing for volume OS
Volume serial number is 44D2-A202
C:.
├───.gem
│   └───specs
│       ├───api.rubygems.org%443
│       │   └───quick
│       │       └───Marshal.4.8
│       └───gems.hashicorp.com%443
│           └───quick
│               └───Marshal.4.8
├───.Icecream Screen Recorder
│   └───log
├───.icesoft
│   └───icepdf-viewer
│       └───_syslock
├───.local
│   └───share
│       └───gem
│           └───specs
│               ├───gems.hashicorp.com%443
│               │   └───quick
│               │       └───Marshal.4.8
│               ├───index.rubygems.org%443
│               │   └───quick
│               │       └───Marshal.4.8
│               └───rubygems.org%443
...
...
...
...

8. "Rmdir" Command
The "rmdir" is the command that is used to delete directories. For example, let's delete the directory named "incident": 
When "rmdir" command is run without parameters, directory deletion is not performed because the directory to be deleted must be empty in order for "rmdir" command to work without parameters. Therefore, it is necessary to use the command with a parameter. When the command is run, a warning will be prompted and if confirmed, the directory will be deleted. 

Note: "/S" parameter: Removes all directories and files in the specified directory in addition to the directory itself. It is used to remove a directory tree.
We covered what the command line is, the importance of the command line in terms of security, and some of the basic commands in this part of the training. You can find other helpful commands and further detailed information on the Windows command line at the following addresses:

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/windows-commands
https://ss64.com/nt/


-- Windows Users and Groups --

About the Users and Groups
There are users and groups on the Windows operating system. The privileges and duties of users and groups on the system may differ. Attackers want to capture the most authorized user on the system. Therefore, the users and the groups they belong to are important from a security point of view. Attackers targeting Windows operating systems want to know what user privileges they have when they are able to send commands to the operating system because what they can do with a lower user profile may be limited. The attacker will attempt to attack back to increase the user authority after he/she figures out that he/she has access to the system with a low user profile. On the defensive side, what the analysts should do is to monitor user activities and detect anything suspicious within a short period of time.

"Whoami" Command
"whoami" is the command that shows which user account accessing the system.

C:\Users\mirko>whoami
cyberpunk\mirko

Note: The format in the whoami command output is "domain\username". If the host that’s making this search is not included in the domain, then the hostname information is displayed instead of the domain.

1. "net user" command
"net user" is the command that displays the usernames within the system. For example, let's see the usernames in the system by executing the command: 

C:\Users\mirko>net user

User accounts for \\CYBERPUNK

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrator            DefaultAccount           Guest
mirko                    WDAGUtilityAccount
The command completed successfully.

If detailed information is desired for a user in the system, a username should be given as a parameter to the "net user" command. For example, let's see the information of the user "Administrator": 

C:\Users\mirko>net user Administrator
User name                    Administrator
Full Name
Comment                      Built-in account for administering the computer/domain
User's comment
Country/region code          000 (System Default)
Account active               No
Account expires              Never

Password last set            26.11.2024 21:19:52
Password expires             Never
Password changeable          26.11.2024 21:19:52
Password required            Yes
User may change password     Yes

Workstations allowed         All
Logon script
User profile
Home directory
Last logon                   16.10.2022 03:52:29

Logon hours allowed          All

Local Group Memberships      *Administrators
Global Group memberships     *None
The command completed successfully.

C:\Users\mirko>

2. "net accounts" command
"net accounts" command allows users to see the configurations related to password usage and logon restrictions on the system. For example, let's see the command by executing it: 

C:\Users\mirko>net accounts
Force user logoff how long after time expires?:       Never
Minimum password age (days):                          0
Maximum password age (days):                          42
Minimum password length:                              0
Length of password history maintained:                None
Lockout threshold:                                    10
Lockout duration (minutes):                           10
Lockout observation window (minutes):                 10
Computer role:                                        WORKSTATION
The command completed successfully.

C:\Users\mirko>

As seen in the image above, some configurations related to all of the users on the system have been successfully displayed on the screen. 

3. "net localgroup" command
"net localgroup" is the command that allows us to perform operations related to groups on the system. If it is used with parameters, different operations can be executed on groups. When used without parameters, it only displays the list of groups on the system. For example, let's see the groups on the system by executing the command without parameters: 

C:\Users\mirko>net localgroup

Aliases for \\CYBERPUNK

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*__vmware__
*Access Control Assistance Operators
*Administrators
*Backup Operators
*Cryptographic Operators
*Device Owners
*Distributed COM Users
*Event Log Readers
*Guests
*Hyper-V Administrators
*IIS_IUSRS
*Network Configuration Operators
*Performance Log Users
*Performance Monitor Users
*Power Users
*Remote Desktop Users
*Remote Management Users
*Replicator
*System Managed Accounts Group
*Users
The command completed successfully.

C:\Users\mirko>

If you want to see the information of a group in the system, the group name should be added as a parameter to the "net localgroup" command. For example, let's see the information for the "Administrators" group: 

C:\Users\mirko>net localgroup Administrators
Alias name     Administrators
Comment        Administrators have complete and unrestricted access to the computer/domain

Members

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrator
mirko
The command completed successfully.

C:\Users\mirko>


User and Group Management via Graphical User Interface (GUI)
- lusrmgr.msc
- gpedit.msc


-- Permissions Management on Windows --

Permissions Management on Windows
Permission management is one of the most important topics to ensure the overall operating system security. The system’s permissions management must be configured carefully. Each system has its own permissions management configuration. Windows has its own permissions management features as well. 

File and Folder Permissions
Each user has its own profile and permissions to prevent unauthorized access to files/folders. Normally, every file/folder gets its permissions from the parent folder in the Windows environment. This hierarchy continues up to the root directory of the hard drive. A user's ability to operate on a file is managed by the granted permissions. 

Viewing File permissions
File permissions operations can be performed via the Graphical User Interface (GUI) easily. For example, suppose we have a file named “file.txt” whose owner is the “LetsDefend” user. Let's right-click on the file and open the "properties" window and switch to the "security" tab
The file permissions have been successfully displayed. This “properties” window contains the list of users and groups and displays the permissions for the selected user/group. If the check mark indicating that the user is allowed for specific permissions types is grayed out, that means that this file inherits its permissions from another folder. If permissions are changed manually, then the checkmark will be in black color. 

Permissions Types
There are 6 different permissions types when managing file permissions: Full Control, Modify, Read&Execute, Read, Write, and Special permissions. The following table provides more information on the permissions types

Read*             
Permits viewing and listing of files and subfolders
Permits viewing or accessing of the file's contents

Write*            
Permits adding of files and subfolders 
Permits writing to a file

Read & Execute*
Permits viewing and listing of files and subfolders as well as executing of files; inherited by files and folders 
Permits viewing and accessing of the file's contents as well as executing of the file

Modify*
Permits reading and writing of files and subfolders; allows deletion of the folder
Permits reading and writing of the file; allows deletion of the file

Full Control*
Permits reading, writing, changing, and deleting of files and subfolders
Permits reading, writing, changing and deleting of the file

Changing file permissions
Changing the file permissions requires one to be the owner of that file. For example, let's see who owns the file “file.txt”. Let’s right-click on the file and open the "properties" window, then click the "advanced" button in the "security" tab

The owner of the file is the "LetsDefend" user. Since we are logged into the system as the "LetsDefend" user, we can make changes on the permissions on this file.
Let's remove the "Read" permissions of the "LetsDefend" user to prevent his/her access to this file. In the security tab of the file’s properties window, let's select the "LetsDefend" user and make changes to the file permissions with the "Edit" button
We put a checkmark for the reading abilities of this user under the “deny” column that will ensure that the files will not be accessed by the “LetsDefend” user. 
Let's try to read the "file.txt" after making the changes as in the image above: 
When we tried to open the file, we receive an error message indicating that we don't have permission to access the file. Users without administrator privileges on the Windows environment are normally not able to access other directories that don’t belong to them. 
Let's try to read the "file.txt" after making the changes as in the image above: 
When we tried to open the file, we receive an error message indicating that we don't have permission to access the file. Users without administrator privileges on the Windows environment are normally not able to access other directories that don’t belong to them. For example, let's login to the "user2" account and try to access the directory of the "user1" account: 
As we see in the image above, we receive an error message indicating that we don't have permission to access to this folder. When we click on the "Continue" button to access, it requires us to login with the administrator credentials
Even if the user logs in with the administrator credentials he/she may still not be able to access the file without the read permissions on the file. 


User Account Control (UAC)

What is User Account Control (UAC)?
User Account Control (UAC) is a security feature in Windows operating systems to prevent unauthorized access. With this feature, certain changes and operations cannot be made without administrator permission. The error message for the administrator permission request in the example above is due to this feature. Although it increases the system security, this feature can be bypassed and violated by attackers from time to time. While it is not a good practice to rely only on this feature to ensure system security, it is also not a good practice not to use this feature. While performing security hardening of the system, "User Account Control" configurations should be applied carefully and correctly, like many other features. 

What is the difference among UAC levels in Windows?
We can access the UAC settings, see different levels, and make changes through the “Security and Maintenance” in the settings menu in the Windows operating system

UAC has 4 different levels: 
1. Always notify: At this level, you are notified before applications and users make changes that require administrative permissions. This is the most secure setting and the most annoying. 
2. Notify me only when apps try to make changes to my computer (default): This is the default level, and UAC notifies you only before programs make changes that require administrative permissions. This is less secure than the first setting because malicious programs can be created to simulate the keystrokes or mouse movements made by a user and change Windows settings.
3. Notify me only when apps try to make changes to my computer (do not dim my desktop): This level is identical to the previous setting except for the fact that, when a UAC prompt is shown, the desktop is not dimmed and other desktop apps can interfere with it. This level is even less secure as it makes it even easier for malicious programs to simulate keystrokes or mouse moves that interfere with the UAC prompt.
4. Never notify me: At this level, UAC is turned off, and it doesn't offer any protection against unauthorized system changes. If you don't have a good security suite you are very likely to encounter security issues with your Windows device. With UAC turned off it is much easier for malicious programs to infect Windows and take control.


-- Windows Process Management --



















