
1. Let’s say your email address is “alice@server-a.com” and you want to send it to “bob@server-b.com”. You compose an mail on your computer. Once you hit “send”, the MUA will put the content into the body of the email and recipient, subject, date, etc. into the header. 

This is like you writing a letter and put it into an envelop and writing your address as the sender and the address of the recipient and then send it to the letterbox.

2. Based on the information in the mail header, your MUA contacts a MTA associated with your domain, i.e. “server-a.com” via SMTP. The MTA doesn’t understand where to send your mail to the address, “bob@server-b.com”, because it can only understand IP addresses. It contacts the DNS in order to resolve the email bob@server-b.com into an IP address. 

This is like your letter has arrived at the postal office and is now looking up where to send your mail to.

3. The DNS translates bob@server-b.com to an IP addresss like “12.345.67.89”. Imagine the DNS as a big table with two columns containing domain addresses and IP addresses respectively. The DNS then checks if the IP address has a Mail eXchanger (MX) record. The MX record is a resource record which specifies the mail server of a domain name.

This is like the postal office is looking up the recipient’s address and checks whether the provided recipient’s address has a mailbox, post-office box, or poste restante to send the letter to.

4. Once the DNS sends the IP address to the MTA, the MTA will transmit your message via different MTAs until it arrives at the recipient’s MTA. The MTA forwards your mail to a MDA. The MDA stores your mail until the recipients retrieves it.

This is like the postal office is calculating the best route. During the route your mail is delivered from one package station to the next until it reaches the package station in your city. Then the post man delivers it to the recipient’s address and put it into the recipient’s mail box, or post-office etc.

5. Once the mail was delivered. The recipient opens his MUA. Depending on whether the recipient uses client based mail or web based mail, the client downloads the emails from the MDA into your local computer resp. your email client synchs with the MDA and displays your emails with their latest statusses.

The last step is basically you open your mail box. 


https://digital.interhyp.de/2021/05/12/how-do-emails-work-in-simple-terms/
