
-- Introduction to Related Careers --

Threat hunting requires one to be constantly attuned to industry trends—which they use to track and identify advanced cybersecurity threats before their systems are targeted. Threat hunters can also work with other cybersecurity professionals to further the security posture of the company. Threat hunters utilize many of the same skills as cybersecurity analysts. In some contexts, threat hunters can also be referred to as information security analysts. Please note that job titles and job descriptions can vary dramatically depending on the hiring organization. A threat hunter is a mid to senior-level cybersecurity position that can, after several years, make professionals eligible for more senior roles:


Network Architect
They design and implement complex computer networks for organizations in various industries. They also sync up with IT professionals to optimize networks for scalability, security, and performance in support of the organization’s current and future needs.

Computer and Information Systems Manager
They analyze their organization’s computer needs and recommend possible upgrades for top executives to consider. They also plan and direct the maintenance of computer software and hardware.

Computer Systems Analyst
These analysts help the organization operate more efficiently by studying an organization’s current computer systems and procedures and designing improvements to them.

Network and Computer System Administrator
These professionals install, configure, and maintain organizations’ local area networks (LANs), wide area networks (WANs) data communication networks, operating systems, and servers.

Senior Security Analyst
Senior Analysts will perform incident response and security investigations which will contain tasks similar to Threat Hunters. They will locate, investigate, and remove malicious artifacts from compromised systems, as well as respond to suspicious network activity that is more complex.

Chief Information Security Officer
These professionals work alongside company officers, business managers, cyber security teams, and IT managers to effectively monitor and maintain the security of their organization’s applications, databases, computers, and websites.

Incident Responder
Incident Responders are responsible for reacting to security incidents such as data breaches or system compromises. They will search systems for any evidence left behind by malicious actors, such as backdoors, files, new user accounts, and more.
